




C++ - Module 00
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff



Summary:
This document contains the exercises of Module 00 from C++ modules.
Version: 11.0


Contents
I Introduction	2
II General rules	3
III AI Instructions	6
IV Exercise 00: Megaphone	8
V Exercise 01: My Awesome PhoneBook	9
VI Exercise 02: The Job Of Your Dreams	11
VII Submission and peer-evaluation	13



















1



Chapter I Introduction
C++ is a general-purpose programming language created by Bjarne Stroustrup as an ex- tension of the C programming language, or "C with Classes" (source: Wikipedia).
   The goal of these modules is to introduce you to Object-Oriented Programming. This will be the starting point of your C++ journey. Many languages are recommended for learning OOP. We decided to choose C++ since it's derived from your old friend C. Since C++ is a complex language, and in order to keep things simple, your code will follow the C++98 standard.
   We are aware modern C++ is way different in a lot of aspects. So if you want to become a proficient C++ developer, it's up to you to go further after the 42 Common Core!
   You will discover new concepts step-by-step. The exercises will progressively increase in complexity.














2



Chapter II General rules
Compiling
• Compile your code with c++ and the flags -Wall -Wextra -Werror
• Your code should still compile if you add the flag -std=c++98
Formatting and naming conventions
• The exercise directories will be named this way: ex00, ex01, ...	, exn
• Name your files, classes, functions, member functions and attributes as required in the guidelines.
• Write class names in UpperCamelCase format. Files containing class code will always be named according to the class name. For instance: ClassName.hpp/ClassName.h, ClassName.cpp, or ClassName.tpp. Then, if you have a header file containing the definition of a class "BrickWall" standing for a brick wall, its name will be BrickWall.hpp.
• Unless specified otherwise, every output message must end with a newline character and be displayed to the standard output.
• Goodbye Norminette! No coding style is enforced in the C++ modules. You can follow your favorite one. But keep in mind that code your peer evaluators can't understand is code they can't grade. Do your best to write clean and readable code.
Allowed/Forbidden
You are not coding in C anymore. Time to C++! Therefore:
• You are allowed to use almost everything from the standard library. Thus, instead of sticking to what you already know, it would be smart to use the C++-ish versions of the C functions you are used to as much as possible.
• However, you can't use any other external library. It means C++11 (and derived forms) and Boost libraries are forbidden. The following functions are forbidden too: *printf(), *alloc() and free(). If you use them, your grade will be 0 and that's it.

3


C++ - Module 00
    
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff


• Note that unless explicitly stated otherwise, the using namespace <ns_name> and
friend keywords are forbidden. Otherwise, your grade will be -42.
• You are allowed to use the STL only in Modules 08 and 09. That means: no Containers (vector/list/map, and so forth) and no Algorithms (anything that requires including the <algorithm> header) until then. Otherwise, your grade will be -42.
A few design requirements
• Memory leakage occurs in C++ too. When you allocate memory (by using the new
keyword), you must avoid memory leaks.
• From Module 02 to Module 09, your classes must be designed in the Orthodox Canonical Form, except when explicitly stated otherwise.
• Any function implementation put in a header file (except for function templates) means 0 to the exercise.
• You should be able to use each of your headers independently from others. Thus, they must include all the dependencies they need. However, you must avoid the problem of double inclusion by adding include guards. Otherwise, your grade will be 0.
Read me
• You can add some additional files if you need to (i.e., to split your code). As these assignments are not verified by a program, feel free to do so as long as you turn in the mandatory files.
• Sometimes, the guidelines of an exercise look short but the examples can show requirements that are not explicitly written in the instructions.
• Read each module completely before starting! Really, do it.
• By Odin, by Thor! Use your brain!!!






4


C++ - Module 00
    
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff



















































5



Chapter III
AI Instructions

? Context
This project is designed to help you discover the fundamental building blocks of your ICT training.
To properly anchor key knowledge and skills, it's essential to adopt a thoughtful approach to using AI tools and support.
True foundational learning requires genuine intellectual effort - through challenge, rep- etition, and peer-learning exchanges.
For a more complete overview of our stance on AI - as a learning tool, as part of the ICT curriculum, and as an expectation in the job market - please refer to the dedicated FAQ on the intranet.


? Main message
? Build strong foundations without shortcuts.
? Really develop tech & power skills.
? Experience real peer-learning, start learning how to learn and solve new problems.
? The learning journey is more important than the result.
? Learn about the risks associated with AI, and develop effective control practices and countermeasures to avoid common pitfalls.


? Learner rules:
• You should apply reasoning to your assigned tasks, especially before turning to AI.

6


C++ - Module 00
    
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff


• You should not ask for direct answers to the AI.
• You should learn about 42 global approach on AI.


? Phase outcomes:
Within this foundational phase, you will get the following outcomes:
• Get proper tech and coding foundations.
• Know why and how AI can be dangerous during this phase.


? Comments and example:
• Yes, we know AI exists - and yes, it can solve your projects. But you're here to learn, not to prove that AI has learned. Don't waste your time (or ours) just to demonstrate that AI can solve the given problem.
• Learning at 42 isn't about knowing the answer - it's about developing the ability to find one. AI gives you the answer directly, but that prevents you from building your own reasoning. And reasoning takes time, effort, and involves failure. The path to success is not supposed to be easy.
• Keep in mind that during exams, AI is not available - no internet, no smartphones, etc. You'll quickly realise if you've relied too heavily on AI in your learning process.
• Peer learning exposes you to different ideas and approaches, improving your inter- personal skills and your ability to think divergently. That's far more valuable than just chatting with a bot. So don't be shy - talk, ask questions, and learn together!
• Yes, AI will be part of the curriculum - both as a learning tool and as a topic in itself. You'll even have the chance to build your own AI software. In order to learn more about our crescendo approach you'll go through in the documentation available on the intranet.
? Good practice:

? Bad practice:



7



Chapter IV
Exercise 00:  Megaphone





   Just to make sure that everybody is awake, write a program that produces the fol- lowing output:

















8



Chapter V
Exercise 01: My Awesome PhoneBook




Exercise : 01My Awesome PhoneBookTurn-in directory: ex01/Files to turn in: Makefile, *.cpp, *.{h, hpp}Forbidden functions: None

   Welcome to the 80s and their unbelievable technology! Write a program that behaves like a crappy awesome phonebook software.
You have to implement two classes:
• PhoneBook
? It has an array of contacts.
? It can store a maximum of 8 contacts. If the user tries to add a 9th contact, replace the oldest one by the new one.
? Please note that dynamic allocation is forbidden.
• Contact
? Stands for a phonebook contact.
   In your code, the phonebook must be instantiated as an instance of the PhoneBook class. Same thing for the contacts. Each one of them must be instantiated as an instance of the Contact class. You're free to design the classes as you like but keep in mind that anything that will always be used inside a class is private, and that anything that can be used outside a class is public.


9


C++ - Module 00
    
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff


   At program start-up, the phonebook is empty and the user is prompted to enter one of three commands. The program only accepts ADD, SEARCH and EXIT.
• ADD: save a new contact
? If the user enters this command, they are prompted to input the information of the new contact one field at a time. Once all the fields have been completed, add the contact to the phonebook.
? The contact fields are: first name, last name, nickname, phone number, and darkest secret. A saved contact can't have empty fields.
• SEARCH: display a specific contact
? Display the saved contacts as a list of 4 columns: index, first name, last name and nickname.
? Each column must be 10 characters wide. A pipe character ('|') separates them. The text must be right-aligned. If the text is longer than the column, it must be truncated and the last displayable character must be replaced by a dot ('.').
? Then, prompt the user again for the index of the entry to display. If the index is out of range or wrong, define a relevant behavior. Otherwise, display the contact information, one field per line.
• EXIT
? The program quits and the contacts are lost forever!
• Any other input is ignored.
   Once a command has been correctly executed, the program waits for another one. It stops when the user inputs EXIT.
Give a relevant name to your executable.












10



Chapter VI
Exercise 02: The Job Of Your Dreams




Exercise : 02The Job Of Your DreamsTurn-in directory: ex02/Files to turn in: Makefile, Account.cpp, Account.hpp, tests.cppForbidden functions: None




   Today is your first day at GlobalBanksters United. After successfully passing the re- cruitment tests (thanks to a few Microsoft Office tricks a friend showed you), you joined the dev team. You also know the recruiter was amazed by how quickly you installed Adobe Reader. That little extra made all the difference and helped you defeat all your opponents (aka the other applicants): you made it!
   Anyway, your manager just gave you some work to do. Your first task is to recreate a lost file. Something went wrong and a source file was deleted by mistake. Unfortunately, your colleagues don't know what Git is and use USB keys to share code. At this point, it would make sense to leave this place right now. However, you decide to stay. Challenge accepted!
   Your fellow developers give you a bunch of files. Compiling tests.cpp reveals that the missing file is Account.cpp. Lucky you, the header file Account.hpp was saved. There is also a log file. Maybe you could use it in order to understand how the Account class was implemented.

11


C++ - Module 00
    
Namespaces, classes, member functions, stdio streams, initialization lists, static, const, and some other basic stuff


   You start to recreate the Account.cpp file. In only a few minutes, you code a few lines of pure awesome C++. After a couple of failed compilations, your program passes the tests. Its output matches perfectly the one saved in the log file (except for the timestamps which will obviously differ since the tests saved in the log file were run before you were hired).
Damn, you're impressive!




































12



Chapter VII
Submission and peer-evaluation

Submit your assignment to your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repos- itory will be evaluated during the defense. Don't hesitate to double check the names of your files to ensure they are correct.
During the evaluation, a brief modification of the project may occasionally be re- quested. This could involve a minor behavior change, a few lines of code to write or rewrite, or an easy-to-add feature.
While this step may not be applicable to every project, you must be prepared for it if it is mentioned in the evaluation guidelines.
This step is meant to verify your actual understanding of a specific part of the project. The modification can be performed in any development environment you choose (e.g., your usual setup), and it should be feasible within a few minutes - unless a specific timeframe is defined as part of the evaluation.
You can, for example, be asked to make a small update to a function or script, modify a display, or adjust a data structure to store new information, etc.
The details (scope, target, etc.) will be specified in the evaluation guidelines and may vary from one evaluation to another for the same project.












13
